Add EIP: Verkle state transition via an overlay tree (#8162)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-7612.md

> eip: 7612

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---
eip: 7612
```

title: State storage transition using an overlay tree
description: Describes the use of an overlay tree to use the verkle tree structure, while leaving the historical state untouched.
author: Guillaume Ballet (@gballet), Ansgar Dietrichs (@), Ignacio Hagopian (@jsign), Gottfried Herold (@GottfriedHerold), Jamie (@), Tanishq Jasoria (@tanishqjasoria), Parithosh Jayanthi (@parithosh), Gabriel Rocheleau (@gabrocheleau), Karim Taam (@matkt)

> discussions-to: <URL>

Reviewer: Need to create a discussions topic in https://ethereum-magicians.org/ and then add the URL here.  
Topic can be as simple as a link to this PR.

status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2024-01-25
requires: 4762, 6800, 7545
---

## Abstract

> This EIP proposes a method to switch the state tree tree format from hexary MPT to a verkle tree: the MPT tree is frozen, and new writes to the state are stored in a verkle tree “laid over” the hexary MPT. The historical MPT state is left untouched and its eventual migration is handled at a later time.

Reviewer 2: Please expand abbreviations (MPT) the first time they are used.

## Motivation

The Ethereum state is growing, and verkle trees offer a good mitigation strategy to stem this growth and enable weak statelessness. Owing to the difficuly of translating contracts with large storage while they are being accessed, proposals for migrating the current MPT state are complex and will require client teams to undergo a long process of refactoring their code to handle this conversion.

> As the state continues to grow, it leads to any conversion process being chosen to take longer. This has an impact both at the moment that the conversion is happening, as well as when full-syncing the chain if the conversion is part of consensus. Fullsync is used extensively by core dev teams to test the performance of new code, a conversion longer than a month will impact the release schedule of client teams who typically release at this rate, and nodes that can not follow the conversion will need to wait longer to rejoin. The conversion will also make reorg slower, so reducing its duration is desireable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The bigger the state, the longer any conversion process will take. This has an impact both while the conversion is happening, as well as when full-syncing the chain if the conversion is part of consensus. Fullsync is used extensively by core dev teams to test the performance of new code. A conversion longer than a month will impact the release schedule of client teams who typically release at this rate. Nodes that cannot follow the conversion will need to wait longer to rejoin. The conversion will also make reorg slower, so reducing its duration is desirable.
```

Changed up some of the sentences to flow better.

    # Added in this EIP
    _overlay_tree: VerkleTree[Address, Bytes32]
```

And the state access functions are modified as such:

```python3
def get_account_optional(state: State, address: Address) -> Optional[Account]:
    account = verkle_get_account(state._overlay_tree, get_tree_key_for_version(addr))
    if account is not None:
        return account
    
    return trie_get(state._main_trie, address)

def set_account(state: State, address: Address, account: Optional[Account]) -> None:
    verkle_set_account(state._overlay_tree, get_tree_key_for_nonce(addr), account)

def get_storage(state: State, address: Address, key: Bytes) -> U256:
    value = state._overlay_tree.get(get_tree_key_for_storage_slot(addr, slot))
    if value is not None:
        return value
        
    trie = state._storage_tries.get(address)
    if trie is None:
        return U256(0)

    value = trie_get(trie, key)

    assert isinstance(value, U256)
    return value

def set_storage(
    state: State, address: Address, key: Bytes, value: U256
) -> None:
    state._overlay_tree.set(get_tree_key_for_storage_slot(addr, slot), value)
```

## Rationale

> This approach doesn't convert the state, which is left to a subsequent EIP. This is meant as a stopgap in case we decide to push the conversion itself to a later time. It has the advantage of simplicity, which means that the verge fork could happen at the same time as other, simpler EIPs. It also requires no change at the consensus layer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach doesn't convert the state, which is left to a subsequent EIP. This is meant as a stopgap in case we decide to push the conversion itself to a later time. It has the advantage of simplicity, which means that the Verge fork could happen at the same time as other, simpler EIPs. It also requires no change at the consensus layer.
```

## Backwards Compatibility

No backward compatibility issues found.

## Test Cases

<!--
  This section is optional for non-Core EIPs.

  The Test Cases section should include expected input/output pairs, but may include a succinct set of executable tests. It should not include project build files. No new requirements may be be introduced here (meaning an implementation following only the Specification section should pass all tests here.)
  If the test suite is too large to reasonably be included inline, then consider adding it as one or more files in `../assets/eip-####/`. External links will not be allowed

  TODO: Remove this comment before submitting
-->

## Reference Implementation

>  * `transition-post-genesis` branch in `github.com/gballet/go-ethereum` implements this when setting `--override.overlay-stride=0` on the command line.

Reviewer 2: Avoid linking to external sources. See EIP-1 for a list of permitted external resources. The "Reference Implementation" section is optional, so you can just leave it out. The other option is to put it in the `assets` directory.

---
eip: 7612

> title: State storage transition using an overlay tree

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
title: Verkle state transition via an overlay tree
```

description: Describes the use of an overlay tree to use the verkle tree structure, while leaving the historical state untouched.
author: Guillaume Ballet (@gballet), Ansgar Dietrichs (@adietrichs), Ignacio Hagopian (@jsign), Gottfried Herold (@GottfriedHerold), Jamie Lokier (@jlokier), Tanishq Jasoria (@tanishqjasoria), Parithosh Jayanthi (@parithosh), Gabriel Rocheleau (@gabrocheleau), Karim Taam (@matkt)

> discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/ethereum-state-trie-format-change-using-an-overlay/4165/1

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/ethereum-state-trie-format-change-using-an-overlay/4165
```

status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2024-01-25
requires: 4762, 6800, 7545
---

## Abstract

> This EIP proposes a method to switch the state tree tree format from hexary MPT to a verkle tree: the MPT tree is frozen, and new writes to the state are stored in a verkle tree “laid over” the hexary MPT. The historical MPT state is left untouched and its eventual migration is handled at a later time.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This EIP proposes a method to switch the state tree format from hexary MPT to a verkle tree: the MPT tree is frozen, and new writes to the state are stored in a verkle tree “laid over” the hexary MPT. The historical MPT state is left untouched and its eventual migration is handled at a later time.
```

> This EIP proposes a method to switch the state tree tree format from hexary MPT to a verkle tree: the MPT tree is frozen, and new writes to the state are stored in a verkle tree “laid over” the hexary MPT. The historical MPT state is left untouched and its eventual migration is handled at a later time.

Author: ```suggestion
This EIP proposes a method to switch the state tree tree format from hexary MPT to a verkle tree: the Merkle Patricia Tree (MPT) tree is frozen, and new writes to the state are stored in a verkle tree “laid over” the hexary MPT. The historical MPT state is left untouched and its eventual migration is handled at a later time.
```
